README.md, before:

# MODIS_HDF_to_TIFF_VIs

Calculate Vegetation Indices from MODIS data

These codes can achieve the following:

* Convert MODIS HDF data to TIFF files and calculate Vegetation Indices NDVI, EVI, NIRv, and LSWI (MODIS_HDF_to_TIFF_VIs.R)
* Reorganize output files by year (Annual_Folders.R)
* Aggregate temporally to 8-day or monthly time series and to user defined spatial resolution (Aggregate_Daily_VIs.R)
* Package the resultant data into NC files for storage and sharing (nc_by_year.R)

## Description

This code is originally designed to work with [MCD43C4 v006](https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/mcd43c4v006/) surface reflectance data, which has a daily temporal resolution. However, it can be adapted and changed slightly to work with other MODIS products. The code currently supports the calculation of EVI, NDVI, NIRv, and LSWI.

Built into the workflow of this code is the reprojection of the resultant VI rasters into WGS84 and their masking with a land cover mask built from MCD12.

## Notes

Most modis data is version 4 HDF, which does not have native support in ncdf4 and other packages. ncdf4 could be built and deployed, but I had difficulty with this and found it easier to just convert HDF layers I need to tiff. This workflow requires extra processing time and is not ideal, but is most convenient.

This workflow uses the MODIS land cover data product to mask out non-land pixels.

The NC file output is basic and not CF compliant, but is sufficient. See my python code for producing CF-compliant NC files.

The extent and spatial info for the tif output of the bands from the hdf are funky,and we use gdal_translate function to pull them into tifs. So we apply the masking and reprojection and correction of the extent when calculating VIs.

## Authors

Russell Doughty, PhD - russell.doughty@ou.edu

## Potential Future Improvements

* None

Commit message:

Rewrite for terra and filtering

README.md, after:

# MODIS_HDF_to_TIFF_VIs

Calculate Vegetation Indices from MODIS data

These codes can achieve the following:

* Calculate Vegetation Indices NDVI, EVI, NIRv, and LSWI and save files in original spatiotemporal resolution (MODIS_HDF_to_TIFF_VIs.R)
* Reorganize output files by year (Annual_Folders.R)
* Aggregate temporally to 8-day or monthly time series (Aggregate_Daily_VIs.R)
* Aggregate spatially to user defined spatial resolution
* Package the resultant data into NC files for storage and sharing (nc_by_year.R)

## Description

This code is originally designed to work with [MCD43C4 v006](https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/mcd43c4v006/) surface reflectance data, which has a daily temporal resolution. However, it can be adapted and changed slightly to work with other MODIS products. The code currently supports the calculation of EVI, NDVI, NIRv, and LSWI.

## Masks

User can define a snow and qc threshold to use when extracting the MCD43C4 data. The code also employs a land cover mask from MCD12 to ensure only land pixels are included in the output. Fork the code to change filters and techniques when processing other datasets, as needed.

A zero tolerance for snow cover was selected per Walther et. al. (2016). We also found that there is very little data in the tropics if the QC filter was set lower than 3 (0 = best and 5 = worst). Thus, we elected to use a QC filter of 3.

## Projection

Output data is projected into WGS84 and also the extent is set to -180, 180, 90, and 90. 

## Workflow

The workflow and codes are listed above in order. It might be necessary to correct the extent on some output files after running MODIS_HDF_to_TIFF_VIs.R. For some reason, the extent on about 10% of the files were not corrected during the processing with this code - which may have had something to do with parallel processing. I have reordered the code and this should not happen again, but if it does run fix_extent.R to loop through the files and correct the extent.

## Notes

Code has been updated to use the terra package, which is a replacement for the raster package. Terra has the ability to extract HDF4 subdatasets directly into memory using sds(), whereas the old workflow was to first write them out to tif using gdal_translate(). Speed is greatly improved.

The NC file output is basic and not CF compliant, but is sufficient. See my python code for producing CF-compliant NC files.

## Authors

Russell Doughty, PhD - russell.doughty@ou.edu

## Potential Future Improvements

* None

## Citations

Walther, S., Voigt, M., Thum, T., Gonsamo, A., Zhang, Y., Köhler, P., Jung, M., Varlagin, A. and Guanter, L., 2016. Satellite chlorophyll fluorescence measurements reveal large‐scale decoupling of photosynthesis and greenness dynamics in boreal evergreen forests. Global change biology, 22(9), pp.2979-2996.

https://github.com/rspatial/terra
